I promise I'm going to focus and lock in
this
time staying focused in today's world
where everything is designed to distract
you is harder than ever and because of
that if you can stay focused for longer
periods of time and work smart you'd be
miles ahead of everyone else use this
video as a test for yourself if you can
reach to the end without skipping it and
really pay attention on a deep level
you'd be in the minority now on top of
all the distractions imagine having ADHD
a neurological condition that makes my
brain wired for distraction by default
but despite this I found a system to
stay hyperfocused and it helped me score
the top grade in my year at University
graduate from Medical School build my
dream YouTube community and now I'm
working as a medical doctor in the UK so
if it worked for my Baseline distracted
ADHD brain hopefully it will definitely
help you whether you have ADH or not all
right let's start with Point number one
to achieve deep focus which Cal newort
describes as a state of distraction free
concentration when your brain works at
its maximum potential we need to take
advantage of this golden window of time
of the day when our brain works the best
this means working alongside our body's
biological clock or circadian rhythm
which controls when we wake up and sleep
and our Peak energy times this chart
shows the spectrum of bi ological clock
so it ranges from extreme morning people
like myself to extreme night people I
feel most awake and energized first
thing in the morning so for me that
golden time of the day where being
focused feels as effortless as it can gu
is when I first wake up which is between
3: to 4:00 a.m. until I need to get
ready to go to work at 8:00 a.m. either
the way I'm aware that 3:00 a.m. wake up
time is not usual but this is what feels
natural to me and I've been like this
since I've known myself that golden time
of the day changes from person to person
so if you're an extreme night hourl on
the opposite side of the spectrum and
you feel most irritable in the morning
and work the best when everyone else
sleeps then I'd recommend you to make
use of nighttime rather than forcing
yourself to wake up early and most
people know by the time they become
adults whether they're naturally a
morning or night person or somewhere in
between but if you're not sure think
back and reflect on the times where you
felt in the zone and work seemed to flow
effortlessly and once you identify that
golden time of your day builds your work
routine around it to achieve deep focus
with minimal effort every day but
difficult thing is if you're a night
hourl working a 9 to5 job this world
isn't designed for you staying up late
to work on your goals during your goals
and time isn't sustainable because you
still need to wake up early to get to
your job if that's the case you can
watch my video on how to train your
biological clock to become more of a
morning person and I've been working on
something special for anyone who wants
more evidence-based tips on how to
achieve deep focus so if you're
interested feel free to sign up for my
free newsletter so the second strategy
is to allow yourself to get bored and do
nothing how do we achieve deep focus by
purposefully doing nothing sounds like a
paradox right Chris Bailey explains this
phenomenon using this graph so we are in
a hyp stimulated State constantly
jumping between things that grab our
attention but when we allow ourselves to
feel boredom we reduce that stimulation
which in turn expands our attention span
and we return to work feeling more
focused so he claims being bored
actually has the same effect as reducing
our phone use lowering that stimulation
and improving focus and we know that
when you let your brain rest and wander
we activate something called called the
default mode Network this is a no
pathway in our brain that becomes active
when we're at wakeful rest like when
we're daydreaming or spacing out in the
shower or just being bored in the car in
traffic which is hard these days because
of Digital entertainment available 24/7
research surrounding this is really
recent and not fully known but what we
know is there is a dynamic interplay
between default mode Network that gets
activated when we're bored and the ex
executive Network which is involved in
focusing and working through tasks so
the idea is to find space in our
schedules to activate this default mode
Network ReDiscover boredom have a
disconnection Ritual from the digital
world even if it's for a few minutes lay
on the couch and see where your mind
goes you know Einstein was known for
daydreaming and using his Day Dreams to
develop his theories so doing nothing is
actually doing something this is
generally when we find those
breakthrough moments I know I personally
come up with the most interesting
thoughts when I'm in the shower so plus
it helps reduce our stimulation so use
boredom as a tool to become more focused
now we come to insanely simple but
hardest to practice number three phone
fasting for many of us whether we admit
it or not social media and phone use has
become a kind of addiction breaking this
habit and creating a healthy
relationship with our devices requires
effort American Psychological
Association says when we're sitting in
front of a computer especially when our
phone is nearby we focus on one thing
for 40 seconds before we switch to
something else it's because when our
phone is inight or even when we know
it's nearby we experience something
called the anticipatory dopamine by the
way dopamine is a chemical in our brain
that enables us to take action and get
motivated just seeing your phone or the
thought of checking your phone triggers
a dopamine response like your brain
knows Instagram is just Within Reach
classic example of this is walking into
a grocery shop seeing the Jung food dial
and thinking ooh I might want those
crisps so hide your phone away whilst
working or leave it in another room
during my medical school exams I was so
desperate that I used to give my phone
to my flat mate rasilla because it's
like she's holding me accountable
putting your phone on airplane mode or
do not disturb is also effective because
our brain respond to cues so just seeing
an email or notification popup can spike
your dopamine making it harder to focus
I feel like Society just got trained in
the last decade that notifications need
to be part of our lives but I personally
do not have my notifications on for any
social media accounts like Instagram Tik
Tok um Snapchat in the end we're all so
train to open these apps by the habits
of dopamine that we're unlikely and miss
anything important you're always going
to open WhatsApp and insta DMS that you
don't need to be told that it's there if
you just turn everything off it empowers
you now you're in control of the timing
of your notifications rather than it
being in control of you fourth don't
attempt to multitask when you try to
multitask you're not actually doing more
than one activity at a time instead your
brain rapidly switches Focus from from
one thing to another this constant
switching uses up brain's main energy
source oxygenated glucose which is
basically sugar attached to oxygen and
it's the exact thing your brain needs to
stay focused as a result multitasking
can lead to faster mental tiredness and
reduce productivity instead focus on one
thing at a time by prioritizing your
work and start with the most important
urgent tasks and work your way through
the list rather than overwhelming
yourself so how can we actually train
our brains to focus for longer as you
improve the skill of deep work it
becomes easier to stay focused for
longer rather than taking minute breaks
in between and it's because of this
phenomenon in physics called the
activation energy it's the initial
effort or mental energy needed to start
focusing on a task once you've started
staying concentrated becomes easier
because you build momentum when you
first start training the skills you
might prefer using pomodora technique so
20 minute work then 10 minute break but
as you progress you can increase the
time you work consistently to 30 minutes
then 40 minutes and eventually hours
once you master the skill of deep focus
then rather than using a countdown you
can use a stopwatch instead now it's an
endurance test against yourself and you
can track your progress and see how long
you can be in this Zone before a brain
for starts to set in this way you won't
need to take breaks as often and I
prefer not to to prevent overcoming that
activation energy all over again if you
want to hear more from me sign up for
our free newsletter and to learn how to
become more of a morning person and
train your biological Club click on this
video bye